.\"
.\" FreeBSD pkg - a next generation package for the installation and maintenance
.\" of non-core utilities.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"
.\"     @(#)pkg.8
.\"
.Dd April 29, 2026
.Dt PKG-RWHICH 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "pkg rwhich"
.Nd display which remote package provides a specific file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl gq
.Op Fl r Ar reponame
.Ar file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
queries the repository catalogues to find which remote package provides the
specified
.Ar file .
.Pp
This requires that the repository was created with the
.Fl l
flag to
.Xr pkg-repo 8
.Pq to generate the file listing ,
and that the client has run
.Xr pkg-update 8
to fetch the file metadata.
.Pp
Unlike
.Xr pkg-which 8 ,
which searches locally installed packages,
.Nm
searches the remote repository catalogues.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width repository
.It Fl g , Cm --glob
Treat
.Ar file
as a glob pattern.
.It Fl q , Cm --quiet
Be quiet.
Only print the package name and version, one per line.
.It Fl r Ar reponame , Cm --repository Ar reponame
Limit the search to the named repository.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Find which package provides a specific binary:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ pkg rwhich /usr/local/bin/bash
/usr/local/bin/bash is provided by package bash-5.2.26_2
.Ed
.Pp
Find which package provides a shared library using a glob pattern:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ pkg rwhich -g '*/lib/libcurl*'
*/lib/libcurl* is provided by package curl-8.7.1
.Ed
.Pp
Quiet mode for scripting:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ pkg rwhich -q /usr/local/bin/python3.11
python311-3.11.9
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm .
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5
for further description.
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev NO_DESCRIPTIONS"
.It Ev PKG_DBDIR
.It Ev REPOS_DIR
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_checksum 3 ,
.Xr pkg_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repo_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-keywords 5 ,
.Xr pkg-lua-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-alias 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-checksum 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-help 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-key 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-plugins 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repositories 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 8 ,
.Xr pkg-unregister 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
