.\"
.\" FreeBSD pkg - a next generation package for the installation and maintenance
.\" of non-core utilities.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.Dd July 27, 2022
.Dt PKG-LUA-SCRIPT 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "lua scripts"
.Nd lua scripts that are run by
.Xr pkg 8
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr pkg 8
run scripts at given phases of the process it is running.
.Pp
The phases are the following:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm pre-install :
run before installing the files on the system.
.It Cm post-install :
run after installing the files on the system.
.It Cm pre-deinstall :
run before removing the files on the system.
.It Cm post-deinstall :
run after removing the files on the system.
.El
.Pp
A package can contain multiple scripts per phase, they will all be run inside
their own lua VM.
.Pp
In the particular case of an upgrade the scripts are run in the following order:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
new pre-install
.It
old pre-deinstall
.It
replace binaries
.It
new post-install
.El
.Pp
Lua scripts are always run after shell scripts (of the same phase).
.Sh API
All the regular lua API are available to the exception of the following changes:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fn io.open
has been modified to only open files relatively to the rootdir if specified by
the
.Ar -r
argument passed to
.Xr pkg 8 .
.It Fn os.remove
has been modified to only remove files relatively to the rootdir if specified by
the
.Ar -r
argument passed to
.Xr pkg 8 .
.It Fn os.rename
has been modified to only rename files relatively to the rootdir if specified by
the
.Ar -r
argument passed to
.Xr pkg 8 .
.It Fn os.execute
has been disabled.
.El
.Pp
The following variables are available defined to any lua scripts:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va pkg_name
name of the package.
.It Va pkg_prefix
.Va PREFIX
defined within the package at build time.
.It Va pkg_rootdir
represents the root directory where the package will be installed as specified
by the
.Fl r
arguments passed to
.Xr pkg 8 .
.It Va pkg_upgrade
Boolean to inform the scripts that it is running or not in the context of an upgrade
.El
.Pp
The following functions have been added:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ft out Fn pkg.prefixed_path "in"
prepend
.Va pkg_prefix
to
.Ar in
if needed and returns it as
.Ft out .
.It Fn pkg.print_msg "msg"
send messages to the user that will be shown at the end of the
.Xr pkg 8
process.
.It Fn pkg.filecmp "file1" "file2"
Compare 2 files, return
.Va 0
if the files are identical,
.Va 1
if the files are different and
.Va >1
if an error occured
.It Fn pkg.copy "source" "destination"
Copy a file preserving its attributes. return
.Va -1
if an error occured
.It Ft st Fn pkg.stat "file"
return an object table
.Ft st
with the following fields:
.Va type ,
.Va size ,
.Va uid ,
.Va gid
.It Fn pkg.symlink "source" "destination"
Create a symbolic link
.Va destination
pointing at
.Va source
.It Fn pkg.exec arguments
Will execute the command
.Ar arguments
expected in the following form:
.So
.Bro command, arg1, arg2, arg3, ...
.Brc
.Sc
.It Ft res Fn pkg.readdir path
Will return an
.Va ipair
with the list of elements contained in the directory
the specicial directory
.Va So .
.Sc
and
.Va Sq ..
are be filtered out.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-keywords 5 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-alias 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-backup 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
