.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" FreeBSD pkg - a next generation package for the installation and maintenance
.\" of non-core utilities.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)pkg.8
.\"
.Dd July 21, 2025
.Dt PKG-REPOSITORIES 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "pkg repositories"
.Nd display configured package repositories
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl l
.Op Ar repositories
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl -disabled
.Op Fl -enabled
.Op Fl -list
.Op Ar repositories
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
displays configured software repositories for the package manager,
.Xr pkg 8 .
.Pp
If given the name of an existing repository as an argument,
only print its configuration.
Without arguments all repositories are printed.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width quiet
.It Fl d , Fl -disabled
Print disabled repositories only.
.It Fl e , Fl -enabled
Print enabled repositories only.
.It Fl l , Fl -list
Print the list of repository names.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/usr/local/etc/pkg/pkg.conf.sample"
.It Pa /etc/pkg/FreeBSD.conf
default system repository
.It Pa /usr/local/etc/pkg/pkg.conf
.Xr pkg 8
configuration, including system repository
.It Pa /usr/local/etc/pkg/pkg.conf.sample
example
.Xr pkg 8
monolithic configuration, including default repository
.It Pa /usr/local/etc/pkg/repos/
location for site specific repositories
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Display all repositories:
.Pp
.Dl pkg repositories -l
.Pp
Display all repositories configurations:
.Pp
.Dl pkg repositories
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repo_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-keywords 5 ,
.Xr pkg-lua-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-alias 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-key 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
