.\"
.\" FreeBSD pkg - a next generation package for the installation and maintenance
.\" of non-core utilities.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"
.\"     @(#)pkg.8
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 30, 2014
.Dt PKG-CHECK 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "pkg check"
.Nd sanity checks installed packages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Bdsr
.Op Fl nqvy
.Op Fl a | Cgix Ar pattern
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Cm --{shlibs,dependencies,checksums,recompute}
.Op Cm --{dry-run,quiet,verbose,yes}
.Op Cm --all | Cm --{case-sensitive,glob,case-insensitive,regex} Ar pattern
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
.Fl B
or
.Nm
.Cm --shlibs
is used to reanalyse shared libraries of installed packages.
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl d
or
.Nm
.Cm --dependencies
is used to check for and install missing dependencies.
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl r
or
.Nm
.Cm --recompute
is used to recompute sizes and checksums of installed packages.
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl s
or
.Nm
.Cm --checksums
is used to find invalid checksums for installed packages.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width dependencies
.It Fl a , Cm --all
Process all packages.
.It Fl C , Cm --case-sensitive
Make the standard or regular expression
.Fl ( x )
matching against
.Ar pattern
case sensitive.
.It Fl g , Cm --glob
Treat
.Ar pattern
as a shell glob pattern.
.It Fl i , Cm --case-insensitive
Make the standard or regular expression
.Fl ( x )
matching against
.Ar pattern
case insensitive.
This is the default, unless modified by setting
.Ev CASE_SENSITIVE_MATCH
to true in
.Pa pkg.conf .
.It Fl n , Cm --dry-run
Merely check for missing dependencies and do not install them.
.It Fl v , Cm --verbose
Be verbose.
.It Fl q , Cm --quiet
Suppress most output, except for error messages and data that the
command explicitly requests.
This is primarily intended for scripting use.
.It Fl x , Cm --regex
Treat
.Ar pattern
as a regular expression.
This uses the "modern" or "extended" syntax described in
.Xr re_format 7
.It Fl y , Cm --yes
Assume yes when asked for confirmation before installing missing dependencies.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm .
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5
for further description.
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev NO_DESCRIPTIONS"
.It Ev PKG_DBDIR
.It Ev CASE_SENSITIVE_MATCH
.El
.Sh FILES
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-backup 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-convert 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
