.\"
.\" FreeBSD pkg - a next generation package for the installation and maintenance
.\" of non-core utilities.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"
.\"     @(#)pkg.8
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 1, 2014
.Dt PKG-INFO 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "pkg info"
.Nd display information for packages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar pkg-name
.Nm
.Fl a
.Nm
.Op Fl AbBDdefIklOpqRrs
.Op Fl Cgix
.Ar pkg-name
.Nm
.Op Fl AbBDdfIlpqRrs
.Fl F Ar pkg-file
.Pp
.Nm
.Ar pkg-name
.Nm
.Cm --all
.Nm
.Op Cm --{annotations,provided-shlibs,required-shlibs}
.Op Cm --{pkg-message,dependencies,exists,full,comment,locked}
.Op Cm --{list-files,by-origin,quiet,prefix,raw,required-by,size}
.Op Cm --{case-sensitive,glob,case-insensitive,regex}
.Ar pkg-name
.Nm
.Op Cm --{annotations,provided-shlibs,required-shlibs}
.Op Cm --{pkg-message,dependencies,full,comment,list-files}
.Op Cm --{quiet,prefix,raw,required-by,size}
.Cm --file Ar pkg-file
.Op Fl -raw-format Ar format
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used for displaying information for packages.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width origin
.It Fl a , Cm --all
Display all installed packages.
.It Fl A , Cm --annotations
Display any annotations added to the package.
.It Fl C , Cm --case-sensitive
Make the standard or the regular expression
.Fl ( x )
matching against
.Ar pkg-name
case sensitive.
.It Fl f , Cm --full
Display full information about the packages matching
.Ar pkg-name .
This is the default.
.It Fl R , Cm --raw
Display the full manifest (raw) for the packages matching
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl -raw-format Ar format
Choose the format of the raw output.
The format can be:
json, json-conpact, yaml (default).
.It Fl e , Cm --exists
If
.Ar pkg-name
is installed and registered in the database, return 0, otherwise return 1.
Useful for checking whether the package is installed.
.It Fl D , Cm --pkg-message
Show the pkg-message for matching packages.
.It Fl g , Cm --glob
Treat
.Ar pkg-name
as a shell glob pattern.
.It Fl i , Cm --case-insensitive
Make the standard or the regular expression
.Fl ( x )
matching against
.Ar pkg-name
case insensitive.
This is the default, unless modified by setting
.Ev CASE_SENSITIVE_MATCH
to true in
.Pa pkg.conf .
.It Fl I , Cm --comment
Display the specified packages and their comments.
.It Fl x , Cm --regex
Treat
.Ar pkg-name
as a regular expression according to the "modern" or "extended" syntax
of
.Xr re_format 7 .
.It Fl d , Cm --dependencies
Display the list of packages on which
.Ar pkg-name
depends.
.It Fl r , Cm --required-by
Display the list of packages which require
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl k , Cm --locked
Show the locking status for
.Ar pkg-name .
When used in combination with
.Fl d
or
.Fl r ,
indicate which packages, dependencies or requirements are locked
by '(*)'.
Locking status is only meaningful for installed packages; all locking
statuses will show as unlocked when information about a
.Ar pkg-file
is queried.
.It Fl l , Cm --list-files
Display all files installed by
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl b , Cm --provided-shlibs
Display all shared libraries provided by
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl B , Cm --required-shlibs
Display all shared libraries used by
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl s , Cm --size
Display the total size of files installed by
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl q , Cm --quiet
Be
.Dq quiet .
Prints only the requested information without displaying many hints.
.It Fl O , Cm --by-origin
Search is done by the
.Ar pkg-name
origin.
Added only for Ports compatibility.
.Pp
.It Fl E , Cm --show-name-only
Hides the full package output and only shows the package name.
This option is deprecated and exists only for Ports compatibility.
.It Fl o , Cm --origin
Display
.Ar pkg-name
origin.
.It Fl p , --prefix
Display the installation prefix for each package matching
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl F Ar pkg-file , Cm --file Ar pkg-file
Displays information from the package archive
.Ar pkg-file .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm .
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5
for further description.
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev NO_DESCRIPTIONS"
.It Ev PKG_DBDIR
.It Ev CASE_SENSITIVE_MATCH
.El
.Sh FILES
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-backup 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-convert 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
