.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.Dd March 4, 2026
.Dt PKG-TRIGGERS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm triggers
.Nd trigger file format
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Package triggers define commands to be executed when particular files are
installed, modified, or removed by
.Xr pkg 8 .
Triggers can be used, for example, to update a database or index of files
based on files installed by other packages.
.Pp
There are two kinds of triggers:
.Bl -tag -width "Per-package"
.It Sy Per-transaction
Executed once at the end of the transaction, after all packages have been
processed and all file changes committed to disk.
Even if multiple packages match the same trigger, it is executed only once
and receives the combined list of matched paths.
.It Sy Per-package
Executed individually for each package as it is being installed or removed.
Per-package triggers run at a specific phase of the operation
.Pq pre-install, post-install, pre-deinstall, or post-deinstall .
Their failure is non-blocking: the package operation continues even if the
trigger fails.
.El
.Pp
Triggers are searched for in the list of directories configured by the
.Ev PKG_TRIGGERS_DIR
configuration option.
By default, this includes
.Pa /usr/share/pkg/triggers
and
.Pa <localbase>/share/pkg/triggers .
Triggers are in UCL format and should have a
.Va .ucl
extension.
.Ss Per-transaction triggers
Per-transaction trigger files are placed directly in a trigger directory.
.Pp
The format is the following:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxx
.It Cm description
An optional string providing a human-readable description
of what the trigger does.
.It Cm path
An array of strings containing exact paths.
Each time a package installs a file or directory whose name is equal to one of
the strings, the trigger will be executed at the end of the transaction.
.It Cm path_glob
An array of strings containing shell-style glob patterns.
Each time a package installs a file or directory whose name matches one of the
patterns, the trigger will be executed at the end of the transaction.
.It Cm path_regexp
An array of strings containing regular expressions.
Each time a package installs a file or directory whose name matches one of the
regular expressions, the trigger will be executed at the end of the
transaction.
.It Cm cleanup
An object which represents the script to execute in case the transaction results
in removal of the trigger from the installation.
The object requires the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxx
.It Cm type
The type of the script to be executed.
The only supported type is Lua, indicated by the value
.Dq lua
(see
.Xr pkg-lua-script 5 ) .
.It Cm script
The script itself.
.It Cm sandbox
A boolean controlling whether the script runs inside a
.Xr capsicum 4
sandbox.
Defaults to
.Cm true .
When disabled, the script has full system access including
.Fn pkg.exec .
.El
.It Cm trigger
An object which represents the script to execute at the end of the transaction
if a pattern has been matched.
This object is required and has the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxx
.It Cm type
The type of the script to be executed.
The only supported type is Lua, indicated by the value
.Dq lua
(see
.Xr pkg-lua-script 5 ) .
.It Cm script
The script itself.
It will receive as arguments the list of paths that matched the patterns during
the transaction.
.It Cm sandbox
A boolean controlling whether the script runs inside a
.Xr capsicum 4
sandbox.
Defaults to
.Cm true .
When disabled, the script has full system access including
.Fn pkg.exec .
.El
.El
.Ss Per-package triggers
Per-package trigger files are placed in a subdirectory of a trigger directory
named after the phase at which they should execute:
.Bl -tag -width "post_deinstall/" -compact
.It Pa pre_install/
Before the package files are extracted.
.It Pa post_install/
After the package files have been extracted and post-install scripts have run.
.It Pa pre_deinstall/
Before the package files are removed.
.It Pa post_deinstall/
After the package files have been removed and post-deinstall scripts have run.
.El
.Pp
For example, a trigger that should run after each package installation would be
placed in:
.Pp
.Pa <localbase>/share/pkg/triggers/post_install/mytrigger.ucl
.Pp
The file format is the same as for per-transaction triggers.
The
.Cm path , path_glob ,
and
.Cm path_regexp
fields are used to match the files and directories of the individual package.
The
.Cm trigger
object contains the script to execute.
.Pp
Per-package triggers are reloaded from disk before processing each package,
so a trigger installed by an earlier package in the same transaction will
be active for subsequent packages.
.Pp
In addition to the
.Va arg
table containing matched paths, per-package trigger scripts have access to
the following Lua global variables:
.Bl -tag -width "pkg_version"
.It Va pkg_name
The name of the package being processed.
.It Va pkg_version
The version of the package being processed.
.It Va pkg_upgrade
A boolean set to
.Cm true
if the operation is part of an upgrade, or
.Cm false
for a fresh installation or a standalone removal.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repo_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-keywords 5 ,
.Xr pkg-lua-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-alias 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-help 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-key 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-plugins 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repositories 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-unregister 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
