.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt PKG-CHECKSUM 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "pkg checksum"
.Nd compute or validate file checksums
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl q
.Op Fl t Ar type
.Ar file ...
.Nm
.Op Fl q
.Fl c Ar hash
.Ar file ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
computes or validates checksums of files using the same algorithms
as the
.Xr pkg 8
package manager.
.Pp
In generation mode (without
.Fl c ) ,
a checksum is computed for each
.Ar file
and printed to standard output in the format
.Do Ar type Ns $ Ns Ar hash Dc .
.Pp
In validation mode (with
.Fl c ) ,
the checksum type is extracted from the provided
.Ar hash
and each
.Ar file
is verified against it.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl c Ar hash , Fl -check Ar hash
Validate
.Ar file
against the given
.Ar hash .
The hash must be in
.Xr pkg 8
format
.Do Ar type Ns $ Ns Ar hash Dc
or a bare SHA-256 hex string for backward compatibility.
Reports
.Dq OK
or
.Dq FAILED
for each file.
Returns 0 only if all files match.
.It Fl q , Fl -quiet
Quiet mode.
In generation mode, print only the checksum (no filename).
In validation mode, suppress output; only the exit status indicates
success or failure.
.It Fl t Ar type , Fl -type Ar type
Select the checksum algorithm and encoding.
The default is
.Cm blake2_base32 .
Supported types:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "blake2s_base32" -compact
.It Cm sha256_hex
SHA-256, hexadecimal encoding (64 characters).
.It Cm sha256_base32
SHA-256, z-base-32 encoding.
.It Cm blake2_base32
BLAKE2b-512, z-base-32 encoding (default).
.It Cm blake2s_base32
BLAKE2s-256, z-base-32 encoding.
.El
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
In validation mode, a non-zero exit status indicates that at least
one file did not match the expected checksum.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Compute a BLAKE2b checksum:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ pkg checksum /usr/local/bin/curl
2$ybndr... (/usr/local/bin/curl)
.Ed
.Pp
Compute a SHA-256 checksum:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ pkg checksum -t sha256_hex /usr/local/bin/curl
1$a1b2c3... (/usr/local/bin/curl)
.Ed
.Pp
Validate a file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ pkg checksum -c '2$ybndr...' /usr/local/bin/curl
/usr/local/bin/curl: OK
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_checksum 3 ,
.Xr pkg_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repo_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-keywords 5 ,
.Xr pkg-lua-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-alias 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-help 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-key 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-plugins 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repositories 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rwhich 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 8 ,
.Xr pkg-unregister 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
