.\"
.\" FreeBSD pkg - a next generation package for the installation and maintenance
.\" of non-core utilities.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"
.\"     @(#)pkg.8
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 30, 2014
.Dt PKG-RQUERY 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "pkg rquery"
.Nd query information from remote repositories
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sm Fl I |
.Ao query-format Ac Sm Ao pkg-name Ac
.Nm
.Op Fl aU
.Op Fl r Ar reponame
.Sm Fl I |
.Ao query-format Ac Sm
.Nm
.Op Fl U
.Fl e Ao evaluation-condition Ac
.Op Fl r Ar reponame
.Sm Fl I |
.Ao query-format Ac Sm
.Nm
.Op Fl U
.Op Fl Cgix
.Op Fl r Ar reponame
.Sm Fl I |
.Ao query-format Ac Sm Ao pattern Ac Ao ... Ac
.Pp
.Nm
.Sm Cm --index-line |
.Ao query-format Ac Sm Ao pkg-name Ac
.Nm
.Op Cm --{all,no-repo-update}
.Op Cm --repository Ar reponame
.Sm Cm --index-line |
.Ao query-format Ac Sm
.Nm
.Op Cm --no-repo-update
.Cm --evaluate Ao evaluation-condition Ac
.Op Cm --repository Ar reponame
.Sm Cm --index-line |
.Ao query-format Ac Sm
.Nm
.Op Cm --no-repo-update
.Op Cm --{case-sensitive,glob,case-insensitive,regex}
.Op Cm --repository Ar reponame
.Sm Cm --index-line |
.Ao query-format Ac Sm Ao pattern Ac Ao ... Ac
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used for displaying information about remote packages.
.Pp
Package repository catalogues will be automatically updated whenever
.Nm
is run by a user ID with write access to the package database,
unless disabled by the
.Fl U
flag or setting
.Cm REPO_AUTOUPDATE
to
.Sy NO
in
.Xr pkg.conf 5 .
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width repository
.It Fl a , Cm --all
Match all packages from the database.
.It Fl C , Cm --case-sensitive
Make the standard or the regular expression
.Fl ( x )
matching against
.Ar pkg-name
case sensitive.
.It Fl e , Cm --evaluate
Match packages using the given
.Ar evaluation-condition.
See EVALUATION FORMAT for details.
.It Fl I , Cm --index-line
Print out the corresponding line from the ports
.Pa INDEX
file for each matched package.
This option is a shorthand
.Ao query-format Ac
argument.
Only the first query format (including the
.Fl I
option) on the command line will be interpreted.
.It Fl r Ar reponame , Cm --repository Ar reponame
Query for data about packages from only the named repository,
irrespective of the configured
.Dq active
status from
.Pa repo.conf .
By default all repository catalogues marked
.Dq active
are queried.
.It Fl g , Cm --glob
Treat
.Ao pattern Ac
as a glob pattern.
.It Fl i , Cm --case-insensitive
Make the standard or regular expression
.Fl ( x )
matching against
.Ar pkg-name
case insensitive.
This is the default, unless modified by setting
.Ev CASE_SENSITIVE_MATCH
to true in
.Pa pkg.conf .
.It Fl U , Cm --no-repo-update
Suppress the automatic update of the local copy of the repository catalogue
from remote.
Automatic repository catalogue updates are only attempted when the
effective UID of the process has write access to the package database.
Otherwise they are silently ignored.
.It Fl x , Cm --regex
Treat
.Ao pattern Ac
as a regular expression according to the "modern" or "extended" syntax
of
.Xr re_format 7 .
.El
.Sh QUERY FORMAT
There are two types of keywords for the query format: the multiline and the normal
one. Only one type of multiline pattern is accepted for a given query.
.Ss Normal patterns:
.Bl -tag -width F1
.It Cm \&%R
Name of the repository package is in
.It Cm \&%n
Name of the matched package
.It Cm \&%v
Version of the matched package
.It Cm \&%o
Origin of the matched package
.It Cm \&%p
Prefix of the matched package
.It Cm \&%m
Maintainer of the matched package
.It Cm \&%c
Comment of the matched package
.It Cm \&%e
Description of the matched package
.It Cm \&%w
Home page of the matched package
.It Cm \&%q
Architecture of the matched package
.It Cm \&%l
license logic of the matched package - nothing for single, & for AND, and | for OR
.It Cm \&%s Ns Op bh
The flat size of the matched package, where
.Cm b
is in bytes, and
.Cm h
is in human readable format.
.It Cm \&%M
message contained in the matched package
.It Cm \&%? Ns Op drCOLBbA
Returns 0 if the list is empty and 1 if the list has information to display
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm d
for dependencies
.It Cm r
for reverse dependencies
.It Cm C
for categories
.It Cm O
for options
.It Cm L
for licenses
.It Cm B
for required shared libraries
.It Cm b
for provided shared libraries
.It Cm A
for annotations
.It Cm \&%# Ns Op drCOLBbA
Returns the number of elements in the list
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm d
for dependencies
.It Cm r
for reverse dependencies
.It Cm C
for categories
.It Cm O
for options
.It Cm L
for licenses
.It Cm B
for required shared libraries
.It Cm b
for provided shared libraries
.It Cm A
for annotations
.El
.El
.El
.Ss Multiline patterns:
.Bl -tag -width F1
.It Cm \&%d Ns Op nov
Expands to the list of dependencies for the matched package, where
.Cm n
stands for the package name,
.Cm o
for the package origin, and
.Cm v
for the package version.
.It Cm \&%r Ns Op nov
Expands to the list of reverse dependencies for the matched package, where
.Cm n
stands for the package name,
.Cm o
for the package origin, and
.Cm v
for the package version.
.It Cm \&%C
Expands to the list of categories the matched package belongs to.
.It Cm \&%O Ns Op kvdD
Expands to the list of options of the matched package, where
.Cm k
stands for option key
.Cm v
for option value,
.Cm d
for option default value, and
.Cm D
for option description.
Option default values and descriptions are optional metadata and may
be blank for certain packages or repositories.
.It Cm \&%L
Expands to the list of license(s) for the matched package.
.It Cm \&%B
Expands to the list of shared libraries used by programs from the matched package.
.It Cm \&%b
Expands to the list of shared libraries provided by the matched package.
.It Cm \&%A Ns Op tv
Expands to the list of annotations associated with the matched
package, where
.Cm t
stands for the annotation tag, and
.Cm v
stands for the annotation value.
.El
.Sh EVALUATION FORMAT
.Ss Variables
.Bl -tag -width F1
.It Cm \&%n
Name of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%o
Origin of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%p
Prefix of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%m
Maintainer of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%c
Comment of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%e
Description of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%w
WWW address of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%s
Flatsize of the package (type integer)
.It Cm \&%a
Automatic status of the package (type integer)
.It Cm \&%q
Architecture of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%M
Message of the package (type string)
.It Cm \&%# Ns Op drCOLBbA
Number of elements in the list of information (type integer).
See
.Cm %?
above for what information is used.
.El
.Ss Operators
.Bl -tag -width F1
.It Cm ~
String glob pattern matching
.It Cm > Ns Op =
Integer comparison
.It Cm > Ns Op =
Integer comparison
.It Cm = Ns Op =
Integer or string comparison
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm .
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5
for further description.
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev NO_DESCRIPTIONS"
.It Ev PKG_DBDIR
.It Ev CASE_SENSITIVE_MATCH
.El
.Sh FILES
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5 .
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
See
.Xr pkg-query 8
for example usage.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-backup 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-convert 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
