.\"
.\" FreeBSD pkg - a next generation package for the installation and maintenance
.\" of non-core utilities.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"
.\"     @(#)pkg.8
.\"
.Dd October 31, 2015
.Dt PKG 8
.Os
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg ,
.Nm pkg-static
.Nd manipulate packages
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl l
.Op Fl N
.Op Fl j Ao jail name or id Ac | Fl c Ao chroot path Ac | Fl r Ao root directory Ac
.Op Fl C Ao configuration file Ac
.Op Fl R Ao repository configuration directory Ac
.Op Fl 4 | Fl 6
.Ao command Ac Ao Ar flags Ac
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Cm --version
.Op Cm --debug
.Op Cm --list
.Op Fl N
.Op Cm --jail Ao jail name or id Ac | Cm --chroot Ao chroot path Ac | Cm --rootdir Ao root directory Ac
.Op Cm --config Ao configuration file Ac
.Op Cm --repo-conf-dir Ao repository configuration directory Ac
.Op Fl 4 | Fl 6
.Ao command Ac Ao Ar flags Ac
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm pkg
provides an interface for manipulating packages: registering,
adding, removing and upgrading packages.
.Nm pkg-static
is a statically linked variant of
.Nm
typically only used for the initial installation of
.Nm .
There are some differences in functionality.
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5
for details.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl v , Cm --version
Display the current version of
.Nm .
.It Fl d , Cm --debug
Show debug information.
.It Fl l , Cm --list
List all the available command names, and exit without performing any
other action.
The
.Fl v
option takes precedence over
.Fl l
but
.Fl l
will override any other command line arguments.
.It Fl o Ao option=value Ac , Cm --option Ao option=value Ac
Set configuration option for
.Nm
from the command line.
Options that are set from the environment are redefined.
It is permitted to specify this option multiple times.
.It Fl N
Activation status check mode.
Prevent
.Nm
from automatically creating or initializing the SQLite database in
.Pa /var/db/pkg/local.sqlite
if it does not already exist.
.Pp
Prevent
.Nm
from performing any actions if no packages are currently installed, on
the basis that a correctly initialised system using
.Nm
will always have at least the
.Nm
package itself registered.
.Pp
If used without any other arguments,
.Nm Fl N
will run the sanity tests and if successful print out a short message
showing how many packages are currently installed.
The exit status should be a reliable indication of whether a system
is configured to use
.Nm
as its package management system or not.
.Pp
Example usage:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
  if pkg -N >/dev/null 2>&1; then
    # pkgng-specifics
  else
    # pkg_install-specifics
  fi
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fl N
flag was first released in the
.Pa /usr/sbin/pkg
bootstrapper
in FreeBSD 8.4,
but was missing from FreeBSD 9.1.
It may not be enough to just call
.Nm Fl N ,
as the bootstrapper may be invoked, or an error returned
from
.Nm .
The following script is the safest way to detect if
.Nm
is installed and activated:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
  if TMPDIR=/dev/null ASSUME_ALWAYS_YES=yes \\
       PACKAGESITE=file:///nonexistent \\
       pkg info -x 'pkg(-devel)?$' >/dev/null 2>&1; then
    # pkgng-specifics
  else
    # pkg_install-specifics
  fi
.Ed
.It Fl j Ao jail name or id Ac , Cm --jail Ao jail name or id Ac
.Nm
will execute in the given
.Ao jail name or id Ac ,
where
.Em name
matches
.Dq Cm jls Ar name
and
.Em id
matches
.Dq Cm jls Ar jid .
See
.Xr jail 8
and
.Xr jls 8 .
.It Fl c Ao chroot path Ac , Cm --chroot Ao chroot path Ac
.Nm
will chroot in the
.Ao chroot path Ac
environment.
.It Fl r Ao root directory Ac , Cm --rootdir Ao root directory Ac
.Nm
will install all packages within the specified
.Ao root directory Ac .
.It Fl C Ao configuration file Ac , Cm --config Ao configuration file Ac
.Nm
will use the specified file as a configuration file.
.It Fl R Ao repo conf dir Ac , Cm --repo-conf-dir Ao repo conf dir Ac
.Nm
will search the directory for per-repository configuration files.
This overrides any value of
.Ev REPOS_DIR
specified in the main configuration file.
.It Fl 4
.Nm
will use IPv4 for fetching repository and packages.
.It Fl 6
.Nm
will use IPv6 for fetching repository and packages.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh COMMANDS
The following commands are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ic help Ar command
Display usage information of the specified command.
.It Ic add
Install a package from either a local source or a remote one.
.Pp
When installing from remote source you need to specify the
protocol to use when fetching the package.
.Pp
Currently supported protocols are FTP, HTTP and HTTPS.
.It Ic annotate
Add, modify or delete tag-value style annotations on packages.
.It Ic audit
Audit installed packages against known vulnerabilities.
.It Ic autoremove
Delete packages which were automatically installed as dependencies and are not required any more.
.It Ic backup
Dump the local package database to a file specified on the command-line.
.It Ic bootstrap
This is for compatibility with the
.Xr pkg 7
bootstrapper.
If
.Nm
is already installed, nothing is done.
.Pp
If invoked with the
.Fl f
flag an attempt will be made to reinstall
.Nm
from remote repository.
.It Ic check
Sanity checks installed packages.
.It Ic clean
Clean the local cache of fetched remote packages.
.It Ic convert
Convert to and from the old
.Xr pkg_add 1
format.
.It Ic create
Create a package.
.It Ic delete
Delete a package from the database and the system.
.It Ic fetch
Fetch packages from a remote repository.
.It Ic info
Display information about installed packages.
.It Ic install
Install a package from a remote package repository.
If a package is found in more than one remote repository,
then installation happens from the first one.
Downloading a package is tried from each package repository in turn,
until the package is successfully fetched.
.It Ic lock
Prevent modification or deletion of a package.
.It Ic plugins
List the available plugins.
.It Ic query
Query information about installed packages.
.It Ic register
Register a package in the database.
.It Ic repo
Create a local package repository for remote usage.
.It Ic rquery
Query information for remote repositories.
.It Ic search
Search for the given pattern in the remote package
repositories.
.It Ic set
Modify information in the installed database.
.It Ic shell
Open a SQLite shell to the local or remote database.
Extreme care should be taken when using this command.
.It Ic shlib
Displays which packages link to a specific shared library.
.It Ic stats
Display package database statistics.
.It Ic unlock
Unlocks packages, allowing them to be modified or deleted.
.It Ic update
Update the available remote repositories as listed in
.Xr pkg.conf 5 .
.It Ic updating
Display UPDATING entries of installed packages.
.It Ic upgrade
Upgrade a package to a newer version.
.It Ic version
Summarize installed versions of packages.
.It Ic which
Query the database for package(s) that installed a specific
file.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
All configuration options from
.Xr pkg.conf.5
can be passed as environment variables.
.Pp
Extra environment variables are:
.Bl -tag -width "INSTALL_AS_USER"
.It INSTALL_AS_USER
Allow to do all manipulation as a regular user instead of checking for root
credentials when appropriate.
.br
It is expected that the user will ensure that every file and directory
manipulated by
.Nm
are readable
.Pq or writable where appropriate
by the user.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh FILES
See
.Xr pkg.conf 5 .
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh EXAMPLES
Search for a package:
.Dl $ pkg search perl
.Pp
Install a package:
.Dl Installing must specify a unique origin or version otherwise it will try installing all matches.
.Pp
.Dl % pkg install perl-5.14
.Pp
List installed packages:
.Dl $ pkg info
.Pp
Upgrade from remote repository:
.Dl % pkg upgrade
.Pp
Change the origin for an installed package:
.Dl % pkg set -o lang/perl5.12:lang/perl5.14
.Dl % pkg install -Rf lang/perl5.14
.Pp
List non-automatic packages:
.Dl $ pkg query -e '%a = 0' %o
.Pp
List automatic packages:
.Dl $ pkg query -e '%a = 1' %o
.Pp
Delete an installed package:
.Dl % pkg delete perl-5.14
.Pp
Remove unneeded dependencies:
.Dl % pkg autoremove
.Pp
Change a package from automatic to non-automatic, which will prevent
.Ic autoremove
from removing it:
.Dl % pkg set -A 0 perl-5.14
.Pp
Change a package from non-automatic to automatic, which will make
.Ic autoremove
allow it be removed once nothing depends on it:
.Dl % pkg set -A 1 perl-5.14
.Pp
Create package file from an installed package:
.Dl % pkg create -o /usr/ports/packages/All perl-5.14
.Pp
Determine which package installed a file:
.Dl $ pkg which /usr/local/bin/perl
.Pp
Audit installed packages for security advisories:
.Dl $ pkg audit
.Pp
Check installed packages for checksum mismatches:
.Dl # pkg check -s -a
.Pp
Check for missing dependencies:
.Dl # pkg check -d -a
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr SBUF 9 ,
.Xr elf 3 ,
.Xr fetch 3 ,
.Xr libarchive 3 ,
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-backup 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-convert 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
.Pp
To build your own package set for one or multiple servers see
.Em ports-mgmt/poudriere
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
command first appeared in
.Fx 9.1 .
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.An Baptiste Daroussin Aq bapt@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Julien Laffaye Aq jlaffaye@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Philippe Pepiot Aq phil@philpep.org ,
.An Will Andrews Aq will@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Marin Atanasov Nikolov Aq dnaeon@gmail.com ,
.An Yuri Pankov Aq yuri.pankov@gmail.com ,
.An Alberto Villa Aq avilla@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Brad Davis Aq brd@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Matthew Seaman Aq matthew@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Bryan Drewery Aq bryan@shatow.net ,
.An Eitan Adler Aq eadler@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Romain Tarti\`ere Aq romain@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Vsevolod Stakhov Aq vsevolod@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Alexandre Perrin Aq alex@kaworu.ch
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh BUGS
See the issue tracker at
.Em https://github.com/freebsd/pkg/issues
.Pp
Please direct questions and issues to the
.An pkg@FreeBSD.org
mailing list.
