.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd April 28, 2026
.Dt PKG_CHECKSUM 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_checksum_file ,
.Nm pkg_checksum_generate_file ,
.Nm pkg_checksum_validate_file ,
.Nm pkg_checksum_type_from_string
.Nd compute and validate file checksums
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpkg
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pkg/checksum.h
.Ft unsigned char *
.Fn pkg_checksum_file "const char *path" "pkg_checksum_type_t type"
.Ft char *
.Fn pkg_checksum_generate_file "const char *path" "pkg_checksum_type_t type"
.Ft int
.Fn pkg_checksum_validate_file "const char *path" "const char *sum"
.Ft pkg_checksum_type_t
.Fn pkg_checksum_type_from_string "const char *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions compute and validate checksums of files.
Multiple hash algorithms and encodings are supported via the
.Vt pkg_checksum_type_t
enumeration.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_checksum_file
computes the checksum of
.Fa path
using algorithm
.Fa type
and returns the raw encoded hash as a dynamically allocated string.
The caller must free the returned pointer.
Returns
.Dv NULL
on error.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_checksum_generate_file
is similar to
.Fn pkg_checksum_file
but returns the checksum in the portable format
.Do Ar type_id Ns $ Ns Ar hash Dc ,
where
.Ar type_id
is the numeric value of the
.Vt pkg_checksum_type_t
enumeration.
This format is self-describing: the type can be recovered from the
string, enabling backward-compatible checksum verification.
The caller must free the returned pointer.
Returns
.Dv NULL
on error.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_checksum_validate_file
verifies that the checksum of
.Fa path
matches
.Fa sum .
The
.Fa sum
argument may be in the portable format
.Do Ar type_id Ns $ Ns Ar hash Dc
or a bare SHA-256 hex string for backward compatibility.
Returns 0 on success, \-1 on checksum mismatch, or an
.Xr errno 2
value if the file cannot be accessed.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_checksum_type_from_string
converts a human-readable type name to the corresponding
.Vt pkg_checksum_type_t
value.
Returns
.Dv PKG_HASH_TYPE_UNKNOWN
if the name is not recognized.
.Sh CHECKSUM TYPES
The following types are defined in
.In pkg/checksum.h :
.Bl -tag -width "PKG_HASH_TYPE_BLAKE2S_BASE32"
.It Dv PKG_HASH_TYPE_SHA256_HEX
SHA-256, hexadecimal encoding.
String name:
.Qq sha256_hex .
.It Dv PKG_HASH_TYPE_SHA256_BASE32
SHA-256, z-base-32 encoding.
String name:
.Qq sha256_base32 .
.It Dv PKG_HASH_TYPE_BLAKE2_BASE32
BLAKE2b-512, z-base-32 encoding.
String name:
.Qq blake2_base32 .
.It Dv PKG_HASH_TYPE_BLAKE2S_BASE32
BLAKE2s-256, z-base-32 encoding.
String name:
.Qq blake2s_base32 .
.El
.Pp
The raw variants
.Pq Dv PKG_HASH_TYPE_SHA256_RAW , PKG_HASH_TYPE_BLAKE2_RAW , PKG_HASH_TYPE_BLAKE2S_RAW
return unencoded binary digests and are intended for internal use.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn pkg_checksum_file
and
.Fn pkg_checksum_generate_file
return a dynamically allocated string on success, or
.Dv NULL
on failure.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_checksum_validate_file
returns 0 if the checksum matches, \-1 on mismatch, or a positive
.Xr errno 2
value if the file cannot be accessed.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_checksum_type_from_string
returns
.Dv PKG_HASH_TYPE_UNKNOWN
if the type name is not recognized.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Compute a BLAKE2b checksum with type prefix:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#include <pkg/checksum.h>

char *sum = pkg_checksum_generate_file("/usr/local/bin/curl",
    PKG_HASH_TYPE_BLAKE2_BASE32);
/* sum is "2$ybndr..." */
free(sum);
.Ed
.Pp
Validate a file against a stored checksum:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if (pkg_checksum_validate_file(path, stored_sum) != 0)
    errx(1, "checksum mismatch");
.Ed
.Pp
Resolve a type name:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_checksum_type_t t = pkg_checksum_type_from_string("blake2_base32");
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_printf 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repo_create 3 ,
.Xr pkg_repos 3 ,
.Xr pkg-keywords 5 ,
.Xr pkg-lua-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-repository 5 ,
.Xr pkg-script 5 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 5 ,
.Xr pkg.conf 5 ,
.Xr pkg 8 ,
.Xr pkg-add 8 ,
.Xr pkg-alias 8 ,
.Xr pkg-annotate 8 ,
.Xr pkg-audit 8 ,
.Xr pkg-autoremove 8 ,
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-checksum 8 ,
.Xr pkg-clean 8 ,
.Xr pkg-config 8 ,
.Xr pkg-create 8 ,
.Xr pkg-delete 8 ,
.Xr pkg-fetch 8 ,
.Xr pkg-help 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-install 8 ,
.Xr pkg-key 8 ,
.Xr pkg-lock 8 ,
.Xr pkg-plugins 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-register 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repo 8 ,
.Xr pkg-repositories 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rquery 8 ,
.Xr pkg-rwhich 8 ,
.Xr pkg-search 8 ,
.Xr pkg-set 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shell 8 ,
.Xr pkg-shlib 8 ,
.Xr pkg-ssh 8 ,
.Xr pkg-stats 8 ,
.Xr pkg-triggers 8 ,
.Xr pkg-unregister 8 ,
.Xr pkg-update 8 ,
.Xr pkg-updating 8 ,
.Xr pkg-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr pkg-which 8
