.Dd December 12, 2025
.Dt PKG_REPO_CREATE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_repo_create ,
.Nm pkg_repo_create_new , pkg_repo_create_free ,
.Nm pkg_repo_create_set_output_dir , pkg_repo_create_set_create_filelist ,
.Nm pkg_repo_create_set_hash , pkg_repo_create_set_hash_symlink ,
.Nm pkg_repo_create_set_metafile , pkg_repo_create_set_sign
.Nd create repository of packages
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpkg
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pkg.h
.Ft struct pkg_repo_create *
.Fn pkg_repo_create_new
.Ft void
.Fn pkg_repo_create_free "struct pkg_repo_create *"
.Ft bool
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_output_dir "struct pkg_repo_create *" "const char *"
.Ft void
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_create_filelist "struct pkg_repo_create *" "bool"
.Ft void
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_hash "struct pkg_repo_create *" "bool"
.Ft void
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_hash_symlink "struct pkg_repo_create *" "bool"
.Ft void
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_metafile "struct pkg_repo_create *" "const char *"
.Ft void
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_sign "struct pkg_repo_create *" "char **" "int" "pkg_password *"
.Ft int
.Fn pkg_repo_create "struct pkg_repo_create *" "char *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn pkg_repo_create_new
Allocates a new
.Ft struct pkg_repo_create *
which should be freed by the caller using
.Fn pkg_repo_create_free .
.Pp
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_output_dir
defines the output directory to save the data in.
By default it will be the
.Va path
provided to the
.Fn pkg_repo_create
function.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_create_filelist
Accept a boolean to define if the file database should be created
along with the metadata database
.Pq deprecated .
Defaults to
.Va false .
.Pp
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_hash
When creating the repository, move all the packages found into a
.Qq Hashed
subdirectory with the
.Qq hash
of the package appended to the name of the package.
Defaults to
.Va false .
.Pp
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_hash_symlink
If the
.Va hash
functionality has been activated, then there will be a symlink for each
packages in the
.Qq Hashed
directory will be created in the root of the repository.
Defaults to
.Va false .
.Pp
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_metafile
Define the
.Va path
to the metafile that will be used when creating the repository. If none is
specified that it will fallback on the internal default.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_repo_create_set_sign
Define the signing mechanism, which will be used to sign the metadata of the
repository. Defaults to none.
.Pp
.Fn pkg_repo_create
Create a repository out of the packages found in the provided
.Va path
